docs/md/guides: database per tenant (#2990)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/database-per-tenant/02-db-groups.mdx

---
title: Defining Target Groups
id: target-groups
slug: target-groups
---

> In Atlas, a target group is a collection of target databases whose schema is managed together. In a database-per-tenant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Atlas, a **target group** is a collection of target databases whose schema is managed together. In a database-per-tenant
```

architecture, each tenant's database is a target database, and all tenant databases are grouped into a target group.
However, you can also group databases by other criteria, such as environment (dev, staging, prod), region, or any other

> criteria that makes sense for your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conditions that makes sense for your application.
```

Author: group by condition sounds weird

Reviewer: So anything else cause you are using 'criteria' in the beginning of the sentence

For example, you might group all databases in the same region into a target group to ensure that schema changes are

> applied consistently across all databases in that region, or to group free-tier databases separately from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applied consistently across all databases in that region. Alternatively, you could group free-tier databases separately from
```

paid-tier databases.

> Target groups can be defined statically or to be dynamically loaded from an API endpoint or a database query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Target groups can be defined statically or dynamically loaded from an API endpoint or a database query.
```

> Target groups are defined in the project's `atlas.hcl` file and are later used by the Atlas CLI during the deployment

Author: ```suggestion
Target groups are defined in the project's [`atlas.hcl`](/atlas-schema/projects) file and are later used by the Atlas CLI during the deployment
```

> Target groups are defined in the project's `atlas.hcl` file and are later used by the Atlas CLI during the deployment

Reviewer: link atlas HCL file

## `env` blocks and `for_each` meta-arguments

Before we jump into various techniques to define target groups, let's first understand the `for_each` meta-argument for
environment blocks in Atlas.

Environment blocks (`env` blocks) are used in Atlas project files (`atlas.hcl`) to group configuration settings for
a specific environment. Normally, an `env` block is used to define the URL of a single target database, like so:

```hcl
env "dev" {
  url = "postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432/dev"
}
```

However, using the `for_each` meta-argument, it is possible to define multiple instances of a specific environment block
by iterating over a list of values. For example:

```hcl
locals {
  target_db_urls = [
    "postgres://root:pass@host-1:5432",
    "postgres://root:pass@host-2:5432",
  ]
}

env "targets" {
    for_each = toset(local.target_db_urls)
    url = each.value
}
```

When the `for_each` meta-argument is used, the `env` block is instantiated for each value in the list, and the `each`
object is used to access the current value. In our case, we will get two instances of the `target` block, one for each
URL in the `target_db_urls` list.

> ## Dynamically Compiling URLs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Dynamically Computing URLs
```

dynamically. Here's an example:

```hcl
variable "db_instance_url" {
  type = string
}

locals {
  tenants = ["acme_corp", "widget_inc", "wayne_enterprises", "stark_industries"]
}

env "tenants" {
  for_each = toset(local.tenants)
  url = urlsetpath(var.db_instance_url, each.value)
}
```

Let's review the code snippet above:
* We define a variable `db_instance_url` that will be used as the base URL for the database instances.
  This variable is provided by the user when running the Atlas CLI by providing the `--var` flag.
* We define a local variable `tenants` that contains a list of tenant names.
* We define an `env` block named `tenants` that iterates over the `tenants` list. For each tenant, we set the `url`
  attribute to the result of the `urlsetpath` function, which combines the `db_instance_url` with the tenant name.

:::info The `urlsetpath` function

The `urlsetpath` function is a helper function provided by Atlas that allows you to set the "path" part
of a URL. For example:

```hcl
urlsetpath("postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432", "mydb")
#  ↳ Evaluates to "postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432/mydb"

> urlsetpath("mysql://localhost:3306", "mydb") # Evaluates to "mysql://localhost:3306/mydb"

Reviewer: you have "evaluates to" twice here ?

Author: 🤦

> urlsetpath("mysql://localhost:3306", "mydb") # Evaluates to "mysql://localhost:3306/mydb"

Author: ```suggestion
urlsetpath("mysql://localhost:3306", "mydb")
```

#  ↳ Evaluates to "postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432/mydb"
```

:::

## Loading data from local JSON files

Suppose our list of tenants is stored in a local file named `tenants.json`:

```json title="tenants.json"
{
  "tenants": [
    "acme_corp",
    "widget_inc",
    "wayne_enterprises",
    "stark_industries"
  ]
}
```

We can load this data into our `atlas.hcl` file using the `file` and `jsondecode` functions:

```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
locals {
  f = file("tenants.json")
  decoded = jsondecode(local.f)
  tenants = local.decoded.tenants
}

env "tenants" {
  for_each = toset(local.tenants)
  url = urlsetpath("postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432", each.value)
}
```

> Next, we define an environment block for this target groups that consumes the `target_tenants` local variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we define an environment block for this target group that consumes the `target_tenants` local variable
```

into the `for_each` argument:

```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
env "tenants" {
  for_each = toset(local.target_tenants)
  url = urlsetpath("postgres://root:pass@localhost:5432", each.value)
}
```

Let's review the code snippet above:
* We define a local variable `f` that reads the contents of the `tenants.json` file.
* Next, we use the `jsondecode` function to parse the JSON content into a structured object.
* We extract the `tenants` array from the decoded JSON object and store it in the `tenants` local variable.
* Finally, we define an `env` block named `tenants` that iterates over the `tenants` list. For each tenant, we set the `url`
  attribute to the result of the `urlsetpath` function, which combines the base URL with the tenant name.

## Loading Data from an API Endpoint

In some cases, you may want to load target groups dynamically from an API endpoint. For example, you might have a

> service `tenant-svc` that provides a list of tenant databases based on some criteria.  Let's suppose this service's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
service `tenant-svc` that provides a list of tenant databases based on some criteria. Let's suppose this service's
```

> endpoints recieve the target group id in the path, such as `https://tenant-svc/api/target-group/{id}` and return a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoints recieve the target group ID in the path, such as `https://tenant-svc/api/target-group/{id}` and return a
```

simple JSON payload:

```json
{
  "databases": [
    "acme_corp",
    "widget_inc",
    "wayne_enterprises",
    "stark_industries"
  ]
}
```

> You can use the `runtimevar` data source to fetch with the `http` scheme to fetch this data and use it to define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `runtimevar` data source with the `http` scheme to fetch this data and use it to define
```

* We define a local variable `pattern` that contains a pattern to match the tenant schemas. In this case, we're looking
  for schemas that start with `tenant_`.
* We use the `sql` data source to execute a query against the database. The query selects the `schema_name` from the
  `information_schema.schemata` table where the `schema_name` matches the pattern.
* We define an `env` block named `prod` that iterates over the results of the query. For each schema name, we set the
  `url` attribute to the result of the `urlsetpath` function, which combines the base URL with the schema name.

## Incorporating Sensitive Data

Essentially, defining target groups in Atlas is about dynamically compiling a list of URLs that represent the target
databases. Database URLs often contain sensitive information, such as passwords, that should not be hardcoded in the
`atlas.hcl` file, which is typically checked into version control.

To address this issue, Atlas provides mechanisms for loading credentials from external sources, such as environment
variables or secret management systems. This allows you to keep your database credentials secure while still being able

> to define target groups dynamically. Learn more about [Working with Secrets](/guides/deploying/secrets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to define target groups dynamically. Learn more about [working with secrets](/guides/deploying/secrets).
```

}

locals {
  db_with_pass = urluserinfo(var.db_instance_url, var.db_user, data.runtimevar.pass.value)
  tenants = ["acme_corp", "widget_inc", "wayne_enterprises", "stark_industries"]
}

env "tenants" {
  for_each = toset(local.tenants)
  url = urlsetpath(local.db_with_pass, each.value)
}
```

Let's review what's going on here:
* We define two variables, `db_instance_url` and `db_user`, which are used to construct the database URL.
* We use the `runtimevar` data source to fetch the password from AWS Secrets Manager.
* We define a local variable `db_with_pass` that combines the database URL, the username, and the password.
* We define an `env` block named `tenants` that iterates over the `tenants` list. For each tenant, we set the `url`
attribute to the result of the `urlsetpath` function, which combines the `db_with_pass` with the tenant name.

:::info The `urluserinfo` function

The `urluserinfo` function is a helper function provided by Atlas that allows you to set the "userinfo" part
of a URL. For example:

```hcl
urluserinfo("postgres://localhost:5432", "root", "p455w0rd")
#  ↳ Evaluates to "postgres://root:p455w0rd@localhost:5432"
```

:::

## Next Steps

> In this guide, we've explored various techniques for defining target groups in Atlas. By using the `env` blocks and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we've explored various techniques for defining target groups in Atlas. By using `env` blocks and
```
